Testing, testing, one, two. It's all good. One, two. Cardiff Cardinal 25th anniversary
project. Interviewer Steve Fletcher. The venue is the Swicker office and the date
is Wednesday the 12th of... 12th... 13th. 13th of November. Interviewer E Graham Hogg
better known as Hoggy. Graham, could you spell your name for the record please?
Well Hoggy is H-O-W-G-E but my yeah Graham is G-R-A-E-M-E. It's Graham Hogg.
Graham Hogg. So... Graham Hogg is a Scots. So Hoggy, how did you first get into Carnival?
Carnival? Well... How did I first get into Carnival? Well I suppose I was... I got into... I'm a stilt
walker and most of my contact with Cardiff Carnival has been as a stilt performer,
dancer, whatever. And I went to Bristol to study circus in the late 80s and I...
in the 80s there's like a big kind of like weird alternative circus scene sort of
kicking off. A lot of connections with travellers and things like travellers were
painting their buses and becoming circuses and in that era full-time was
non-accredited so it was much more independent, running their own courses,
their own kind of tutors and their own style of doing things and really good
mix. It was really good scene. It was in St Paul's and when I went there I know I
studied a bit of everything, bit of clowning and mass work, juggling and all these things
and no one was doing stilts at all. Literally the stilts were the wooden stilts
you held on there in the cupboard. No one was interested in them whatsoever and
I've been doing... I've done some stilts actually previous to that when I lived in
Wales actually. I lived in Mid Wales and lived in in Hengindob Wells and there was a
street theatre group there called What the Dickens, called Chris Orenzella.
They still have a Dickens festival every year.
Well the Victorian festival, I lived in Hengindob Wells and that festival would
happen. I saw it like you know probably five years and I was just a you know a
bit of a dropout, a bit of a dope smoking dreadlocks. I didn't really have much
interest in performance and enjoying What the Dickens, learned stilts and
then developed this kind of you know appetite for street
performance and saw a lot of performers at that festival, actually good staff, people like
Dave Sullivan and that who was really good still walk and classic old-school
kind of proper street busker. Very limited skills, very basic
show but he had the whole way of getting a big crowd around and you know
generating a sort of pattern for the crowd which is a kind of formula with what
street stuff follows really and has followed since. So anyway, so Kenzie
Bristol, loads of circus going off, everyone wanting to do trapeze, everyone
juggling but no one was doing stilts and so I was kind of interested in stilts and
then I bumped into this other guy Kevin who people said to me, oh Kev's into stilts, you know she
woke up with him. So we sort of met, talked and stuff. This is Kevin Dennis.
So this is Kevin Dennis, yeah from Hoggy and Kev. Kevin Hoggy, usually Kevin Hoggy isn't it.
So yeah, so then I remember Kev saying oh there's this performance in the
centre of town that's they call it Stilt Walkers, they're interested in doing it
and I said yeah, yeah okay let's go. So we went to the Onfini on the quayside there in the centre of town
and it was an artist called Keith Kahn who was designing this big sort of carnival
performance thing, flying costumes, flying costumes flying to him,
something that I can't remember. You probably remember more about it. You say you were there.
No I saw it, it was a huge outdoor, multimedia outdoor celebration in the Lois Antitheter with an audience of about
4-5,000 people. Yeah, I remember the two, they're two like king cranes to hold the sort of these flying things
yeah which were hanging on either side. So me and Kev, so no one else came, just me and Kev
at this kind of audition. Keith was there and I think he was a stilt walker I think. It danced up on stilts
and he had these kind of black, tall thin black costumes. It was like essentially a skirt, a long skirt
from your waist down to the bottom of the stilts and then a burka over the top. So it was a burka, no arms
or anything, no sleeves. And we devised this sort of step, this kind of slow motion rocking step in the
in the Arnolfini Theatre that he liked. He said okay I want you two to wear these black costumes and come on
from stage right so it's the audience's left at a certain point during the show. What did you represent?
I don't know, I guess they were female characters, burkas. But I remember a lot of people
really remembered that moment, a lot of people that it really impacted with them mostly when
everything goes quiet and then these two figures kind of come rocking on and go across stage.
Years and years later we looked through the Arnolfini's archive and there was a photo
documentation of it and stuff in their archive and things you know, tracked it down. I didn't get any
copies of stuff but um so that was the first time I'd done stuff. I'd sort of seen suddenly how
stilts could potentially had for kind of outdoor visual impact you know because you're high up
and everyone can see you and then all those things. So I kind of got a sense of it. So I
remember going back to the Arnolfini bar with Kevin and showing him all these drawings and
sketches that I'd made of kind of stilt ideas, stilt costumes. The weird thing was I was thinking
about the other day is looking back on them they were all pretty cheesy actually, all like really
quite daft, things like people on top of toad stools and things like fake legs and things.
Pretty awful most of them actually and in a way they were kind of like a premonition of like the
walkabout industry really that sort of that fired off like 10 years later.
Yeah I mean I watched some of these they just they're kind of cheesy costumes. Me and Kev,
so we started our working relationship there and then Kev disappeared to France and work in
Malibu and he came back and we did a St Paul's. He came back and we'd started doing stuff with
Bristol School of Samba as stilt dancers, me and Kev.
No we weren't because we did a St Paul's carnival in Bristol
and we went to the mass camp which is like in the Albany Centre at the time.
Alan May was around.
Garfield was the other guy that was in St Paul's then.
Samo, Samba wasn't playing.
No, but Bristol were then one of the sort of top Samba groups.
There was only a few then.
Didn't they perform on the back of a lorry because they do that in St Paul's, it drives me nuts.
There were, yeah St Paul's did have lorries. Now it's all gone sort of like you know electric
carts and things it's kind of like portable sound system and stuff and but then it was a lot of
lorries and sound systems and lorries and things yeah. So we did this, so we remember we had quite
a few kids from sub-school and we sort of you know we made some stilts we taught them and we
had to design kind of you know eight costumes and that's when I came out with this kind of
headdress thing on the beak. So it's four bits of rattan cane bent over to a beak sort of taped
together. Other bits of put inside like a wire framework and then you just basically colour the
sticks so you don't make any sides or you don't make it solid. It's just you know ribbon colours
the sticks tassels at the back some eyes and then it sits on top of your head and it and the way
it's designed was it was going to rat a square hole that you put your round head in. So for years
after designing that headdress that would give me like chronic every time I played the zombie
zombie character it would give me like sort of chronic headache because of this awkward fit.
So we went through like a long you know quite a few years of doing it as a kind of a ritual it
would be like it was a pain thresh we had to go through you had to get the headache you had to
kind of go beyond it you had to kind of trance trance out into the so that was with the jumbies
the jumbies were of course the jumbie of course is a moco jumbie so moco jumbie is the
rresti indian trinidadian or rresti indian kind of striped man character on stilts moco jumbie.
So we whilst we're developing these headdresses you know they're kind of like they became bird
characters and they're very portable costumes so you could have them take the headdress off
stuff it with a bit of ripstop tassels on your feet that go in your bag the wings with like
bamboo sticks with you know feathers underneath roll up going stilts. I remember you used to come
over on the train and have a meeting. Yeah we neither me nor Kev ever drove so we we just went
everywhere and bus yeah so that was our style was to have like very minimal costumes or things that
we could build and we went to places so we could design stuff out of cardboard or other types of
materials and stuff you know so that so we did st paul's which was okay I was still very green
then and and kev had done malabar and stuff so he knew how to really come up with that.
Well malabar he went off so malabar i think was one of the big big outdoor french street
street companies you know based in um the southern town you know the southern um
what's it called Montpellier yeah Montpellier in Montpellier um and they you know they you know
they did things that like huge big they're big fire and water fire and ice show thing involved
like these two massive big processions that have started independently of each other so the reds
and the blacks all start off in some square somewhere the big crowd gathers and then they
they start parading but then in a different part of town there's this big white encampment with all
the white characters and stuff you know and they kind of do like a little parade around a square
and then the reds invade and then with the ship and this is huge you know I know it's all photos
yeah huge amount of pyrotechnics all all strapped onto their stilts and things you know
let them off as they go around firecrackers let off germs on their stilts you know throw
fireworks at each other and stuff you know it was crazy so when he came back from that all kind of
fired up and had a lot of ideas about what he wanted to do you know so i was still quite agreeing
when we did the first st paul's carnival um but then so we did that and then sam bristol sam said
oh we've done this kind this carnival in cardiff so you should come up for that so that's when we
that was the columbus that was 1993 yeah that was the first time we were involved in in cardiff
when we were yeah we were the sort of wings yeah so it's sort of you know quite brightly coloured
yeah quite brightly coloured but we had that thing as well where we weren't really you know
we were kind of we just came with bristol so we were sort of we realized it was sort of crashing
the party a little bit you know we weren't sure whether you know there was a permission thing and
whether we could where we could go and not go and stuff um and so yeah we just did the thing where
you run a crowd you can go to the front and run at crowds and really sort of stir things up
on the street and have that kind of freedom of movement leading craze and sort of being
pathfinders and yeah so yeah pioneers they're out there front sort of you know john the baptist
yeah here comes the parade yeah and good at clearing crowds and we've done you know we've done
by that time we were both quite confident i suppose already you know we've done glass
for me a few times and we felt you know sort of quite accomplished in our in our ability because
like i said about you know the circus scene no one was doing them you see no one was doing stilts at
all they just weren't interested in them it didn't and our thing about stilts was that we didn't
see them as a circus skill like that was street performance yeah they we were both aware after
we looked into quite quickly that they were not they just didn't fit really in the world of circus
you did have the guys with stripy trousers you know you did have circus families
who would all walk in sort of 10 foot stills ever but for us it was like well actually these
are these are something else completely different these these belong in some other context yeah um
so once we could did a couple of carnivals we thought you know actually carnival is really
an interesting context for them to be and you know yeah because you've got like the visual impact of
the the costumes and things and the whole form of the parade and as a giant big piece of theatre
you know so that appealed to us much more still walking traditions in carnivals throughout the
world yeah that's where they appear yeah yeah um so yeah we became interested in that and we for
us it was a perfect kind of platform for sort of devising our ideas and developing our
our approach to all the stuff we did on on stills you know i mean in a way like you know the card
the card if the carnivals are probably the the only paid gigs we ever did we kept working together
the rest of the time we you know we would literally make up a costume for an event or
person would do it once and that was it we you know and this is before the whole walkabout
industry really kicked off and so we felt like we were kind of like quite we were not any you know
we were kind of pathfinders in another sense then as well kind of going right ahead a lot of ideas
were taken and used by other people later on who took you know massive commercial like the high
wise high wise rubber all those guys that was a direct copy i think of an early thing that me and
kev did this kind of thing or gactic where we we use rats rat and cane with bin liners over the
top and if you heat if you heat bin liners um plastic bin liners with um you know like a
heat gun and it shrinks and becomes like a skin you can get it really tight over forms and stuff
and it's super light so we'd you know literally we could travel around and just make things out of
wire frames and then use bin line and then create these big wings and weird horns and things like
that you know we did like that when we traveled around and body paints as well i remember you
guys were very much into body paint yeah i mean yeah yeah body paint yeah i always hated body paint
actually weirdly enough and funny because kev kev was born in africa actually he's born in kenyon
and um so his skin he could he had this kind of smooth skin i always remember in dressing rooms
like he could just paint himself with body paint all over really well and then perform come back
and just wash it all off like i've never been there but i was my skin's like sort of like a
white pasty sponge when i put when i put it on it's not stained me you know i was really jealous
of his if he's like skin that you could just take body paint but but yeah it's that thing of just
like it being a simple costume you know because we never wanted to hide the stilts you know they
threw up the mat the guy that striped your trousers he hides his stilts he pretends he's
pretends he's a tall man with his little boots we hated that for us it was always like just don't
show the stilts show that you are personal stills isn't you know people know that so just go with
that for stores there's a four-legged anima i think he'd seen that i think he'd seen that at
malabar i think at malabar there was a giant butterfly that was a really heavy costume that
involved sort of legs um so you know you kind of get a crutch a long aluminium tube and stuff and
then you can when do you start putting backpacks onto your well we learned that from you know from
from carnival excellent now we saw those we saw some aluminium backpacks even in st paul's and
then loads when we came here and then yeah you could sort of again it just suddenly adds a new
dimension to adding yeah adding more height yeah and wings and things we did um come in the year
is the knotting hill we do we're trying to find out what it is but we did we got bristol were doing
the samba with this big group academic costume madriere um and they said do you want to come
through some um costumes designs and costumes for that and we said what you got in mind they
said well they just kind of want something like vultures or something so we we um design these
costumes that i was you know or even to this day i've always been the things i've most been happy
with in terms of my actual my own costume my own actual design for this costume we had a ratan
headdress it's like the jumbies but they they sat on top on your head so it's like a vulture's beak
and then a big white ruff around the neck again just black black clothes but then with a backpack
that elevated the wings up only about a foot just above your head height because vultures have got
a thing where their heads are lower than their wings so if you look at pictures it's like um
back to backpack with with the wings attached up here and then the wings are sticks of bamboo
going out either side with sticks coming down that you then hold the wings up and i found like a
drawing of a condor eagle and then enlarged it up so scaled it up till it was like sort of 15
feet wide on and then drew it out on a single sheet of muslin wow so painted the feathers in
like pva with gaps in between painted it all black so it was like this exact bird frame that
just then was attached to the the thing and you could if you had the sticks up and you can move
it it was like incredibly mobile and if you let go of it just draped down the back so for stilt
walk it was just a dream would these be duro stilts or would these now they were always peg stilts
yeah we never we never worked in duro stilts duro stilts went out then in those early days
but when they did come out and then with the walkabout boom started and and people started
to kind of exploit the ability to stand still that was kind of yeah it's kind of game over for us
we never I mean I have worked on them recently constant motion really you seem to be yeah yeah
constant constant motion you're balancing you can use you can work much faster you can do
certain you know it's much greater range of moves and stuff yeah you can really run
I remember moves where you're using one leg and another leg yeah yeah you can hop on legs and
and hopping yes lots of one legs yeah bending forwards and holding it and
dual stilts by contrast it's literally just like standing on it it's like standing on a mini you
know kind of step that finding a super high wall to get stilted up or a van you're off another
roof of a van yeah with high enough stilts you did like a van or garage roof yeah usually like a bin
like a big great big wheelie bin with quite a good height you asked me the other day about high stilts
you didn't really do much on high stilts 10 foot or two meters I think the highest we ever went up
to you know it's like walking in mud you know steps are much slower you know and it's quite scary
actually are quite scary so after 93 I think you take the sex through your other you know
carded carnival history well I mean when we when I think we I think we made a big impression on you
when we did the columbus thing because I remember I fell in love with the John B's I'm the first to admit
it was really good to get that kind of reception and something we understood the
the whole street parade thing and um so I in my memory I remember that we kind of became we became
involved every year there for quite a few years yeah but it's been quite hard to sort of pin down
the dates I think the year after it I think I did but I definitely did um definitely did freedom
blues altogether um what costumes were playing and then well uh freedom blues that was when we
used cardboard and we sort of built a whole all the people that were going to be on stilts so I
guess we came up and and people signed up to do stills and then we did workshops and train you
know taught people and train them and yeah and had a capacity of um you know whatever half a dozen
to a dozen sort of still walkers and Reese would have been around at that time yeah Reese and Cora
is in that pictures as well Kevin's daughter yeah um Reese was really you know he was very young at
that time wasn't he yeah and he was super able he got up and he was running around you know he's
model student in a lot of ways and you were like beatboxers in cardboard yeah we sort of
and yeah I think we're sort of pastiche in youth culture we were trying to get Mickey out yeah
that's right it was big big big records that we threw out yeah yeah I mean I sort of love
cannabis leaf sort of things and all hats and yeah things you know things like we sort of said shitty
sort of like stussy and this sort of stuff stussy but sort of shitty cardboard and uh kind of like
logos and graphics so yeah it's kind of maybe like sort of pastiche of sort of I think we got
we got a picture on one of the local papers here I think in front of the big museum in between the
columns and it said something like you know sort of self-mockery that youth culture sort of self
mocking itself you know so someone kind of got it in a nice friendly sort of way yeah yeah yeah
um that was really good fun it was very cartoonish I thought yeah because you know again it's that
thing about particularly for certain material just using like sheet cardboard yeah making
shorts and sort of solid costumes out of cardboard so a lightweight they're kind of you know disposable
you know
yeah so cardboard you know against that thing about having a simple
medium you're working with you know carbon what can you do with it you know
you may make some sort of pumps some big white pumps out of cardboard and
um so that was then so that was yeah that was freedom freedom blues and then also gaden
um and then we're doing a group as well where there was kids young kids who wanted different kind of car
related bits and bobs and costumes one one kid had like you wanted to be like sort of burst tire so
he's in this kind of costume which is a tire all in shreds and stuff and quite young kiddy and another
guy had like a sort of coffin on his back it was like a speaker so it was like a coffin that was
on a backpack made out of like sheet um that printing aluminium sheet material would david
be in that one did he come across him was he was he the guy that was in the sammer band
yes that's right yeah he was around then he's one of the faces that I remember I remember him liking
him getting his own stilts and then being in the sound you know just being in the sammer group but
on stilts you know sort of taken to them so he was around then um so that was all together yeah
I remember I remember like having to spend so much time getting out of the people's costumes
ready for that one and I didn't know what I was going to do and then I actually in the end just
had like black and white stripes with four legs and my face was sort of like a crossings like a
zebra crossing but my I remember my my sort of my my like or black trousers sort of split
right by my balls so the whole that parade my balls just kind of hanging out
of this costume yeah hopefully no one spotted them it was never part of the design you know
um so yeah so when I yeah so when we've looked at um images and stuff and it looks like I was
I was here for a few but um I guess it was such a big sort of time in my life I remember it being
much more I think Kevin Kevin carried on after me much more you know yes but so I only thought I
did a few I think I came filmed but you carried on a long tradition of a long journey in carnival
and and elsewhere was your next step after Cardiff Trinidad and Peter Minchel the guru of the mass
the masquerade yeah because I think we went I think to Trinidad 96 I think that was the year
we went so you could probably cross reference it for finding out what what year he did read um
but yeah we we got some money from I think Arts Council something those awards for all type things
sort of still at workshops and all these things we're trying to do in Bristol which you know we
didn't get together and we had a bit of money at the end of it a few thousand and I said to Kev
come let's just go you know let's we've got contacts there we can get something to crash let's just go
and and try and be involved in it so and you say it was Maryanne Roberts who made the initial
yeah I think she made the connection see it she might have had a family home in um
port of Spain where we spent we did stay for one or two days and then she she sort of tried to get
us into the the Minchel camp basically in the into the mass camp what was that experience like being
part of yeah yeah it was pretty mind-blowing actually um looking back I mean it was I mean
I just remember spending the whole time in the shade I just remember never actually being out in
the sun because it was just so hot just too hot um when we got into the mass camp we sort of drive
out of town it's like this big sort of hangar airplane hangar military thing it was just
saving such a huge scale um they kind of knew we were still walkers but but to get to stay there
in the actual mass camp and just sort of literally crash crash out rough on the floor on the cardboard
and forward a sort of sheet over you get fed there sleep on the shelves sometimes yeah we found a
few places but then they were kind of they belonged to certain people so you'd go out and
sort of sleep on the shelf and then you know after an hour someone would come in tapping
you know to get off got to get off their place and you know so we came lower in the packing order
there so it rose up through the ranks of costume assembling because the foreman who ran the place
Murph I think he sort of took us he liked us you know we're quite hard workers and
and actually were quite able so we can't start we ended up doing all these really fancy head
dresses and things and um and then we didn't really ever know what how whether we were going
to get to be in the parade you know because it's one of the things where we were sort of
hoping to sort of find a way of being involved in it but but every all the costumes are
prescriptive they're all designed and made and the people buy them you know and there might be
hundreds and hundreds of them but they're still designed and they're very particular as you know
it's like a very particular theme and that that year the theme was red and all the same red
and all these costumes at year were these kind of like characters of handbags and
royal sort of looking costumes and things you know gentlemen women and
nothing big at all no backpacks nothing like that just all really quite simple kind of ball almost
um sort of costumes and then sort of the day before we someone said oh um yeah Peter's he's
going to let you lead he's going to let you lead the parade and this is Peter Mitchell this is a
guru man who's well open to olympic games effectively yeah yeah so you're going to
lead Peter Mitchell's 1960 1996 that's extraordinary yeah and what were the costumes
how did the costumes arrive and then because so yeah i think we'd i think we must have got up on
stilts during the the time we were there just to sort of show our skills off now we because they
had while we were there another little tangent actually is that there was a stilt group there
in in port of spain dragon's yard guy called dragon quite famous yeah yeah yeah and so marion
took us down to meet them and that was a big thing as well that was a big thing was dragons still
going i haven't heard about it i think i don't know i think kev's more you know kept in contact
with people they kept his eye on people they might have even come to europe at some point definitely
they've been to liverpool yeah so we went down to that yard met him and and we sort of turned up
you know these kind of white boys with their kind of metal stilts you know all the kids were laughing
at us and that was amazing seeing them and they were these tiny little kids you know as high as
my kind of shoulders on on 10 foot stilts and doing some amazing moves and things it was quite
and there's that's that german photographer was out there at that time stephan and i have just written
it down moko juby's book we used to have a book here we were we were there when he was there and
he asked us i mean kev relishes this story more than me but there was this one shot when all the
kids are taking a rest yeah and they're all sitting on this huge wall of this i know the
photograph of which you speak and he asked us to not we were sitting down at the end and he asked
us to get out of the photo he asked us to step out of the way
so yeah we said it was nice to have that other little connection there what was the experience
on the day like i mean so coming back to the day so then they said oh yeah these costumes arrived
and they were literally just trousers long trousers and a long sleeve top with a little
red hat and that was kind of it you know that was it but but at the same time i think you know
that's sometimes that's it isn't it you do less you do more with less you know you just have
something simple you know they're like jester sort of type thing so so yeah i mean um we sort
of assembled on the day of about 11 o'clock and and like i said to the other day you know we did it
we did it all wrong we sort of stayed up and still it's a whole day and tried to give it sort of
maximum energy all day which is a 12 hour day
so if i ever went back i still feel like i need to have one more go at it because you know
because i can still actually get up and stuff now and bust pretty good moves i think
if i knew i could get up and down all throughout the course of the day and have like you know like a
three or four meals with rests in between and stuff then yeah come on bring it on but that's
what people were doing so they were breaking up they were assembling for the judging points
parading marching past and then just assembling throughout yeah but that that thing of like
stopping resting eating and then reassembling for the next leg and then stopping eating socialising
reassembling that was that's how it works yeah how else can you can you span it over 12 hours
so we were just up the whole time it ends in the big stadium so again like i said to the other day
we got down just before the big stadiums you got down to for the last leg and i was
i could just could hardly walk on the ground let alone get back up and still so i remember being
absolutely exhausted beyond anything i'd experienced before you know with the heat
and the whole the whole thing and you know all our moves been done the first hour and a half of the
parade so now it's like 10 hours in you imagine just couldn't be couldn't even hop and i remember
just being down resting by the side by the street by this fan shade and then peter mitchell sort of
turned up um and he just stopped and said oh yeah you guys have been going all day you know
and so there he was you know and we were too tired to even talk you know just glad that
we're kind of there yeah kind of a god yeah sort of just coming at that moment and then we got up
yeah we got up and thing he had that year was he had three big giant letters he had red made in
these big sort of you know eight foot high big plywood um forms that were painted red and stuff
so they got bought on stage at that point sort of laid out yeah that's the stage um and yeah i mean
you know got up and then literally i hobbled across that stage you know literally
yeah my biggest missed opportunity in my life my moment could have been there to
have been the other way around it would be in the beginning could have gone on that stage and kind
of gone you know come on you know literally just could not just managed to get the other side of it
so bad um so that was trinidad yeah that was that was but i mean you know it seems to me you still
have the same inquiring mind the same interest in things carnival and way beyond um tell us about
your connection with haiti uh originally through which as well i'll let you tell the story via the
cube start there and then perhaps take us take us to jacama yeah jack now let's start with the the
earth jack well i suppose actually after trinidad i suppose 96 because i think that's when i stopped
because the cube was started in 98 yeah completely independent volunteer run
sort of um cinema music venue art space pistol um so you was born in 96 as well i think 96
was when we did st donats isn't it that was in 95 96 yes so this is swicker doing the uh end of
the beyond the border storytelling festival yeah sort of an outdoor show what do you call about
that what was your role in that what do you mean that was great i remember i mean kept on site for
yeah a little sign up on the top there crazy crazy guys um had some pretty crazy times they've just
like one giant party basically one giant kind of hot spoons as they used to do you remember the
hot spoons burning yeah you get down your knees and then sort of like a big big dessert spoon of
brandy and sort of flick it down your your kind of mouth a lot of that they were serious party
heads but they also kind of had a you know it's meg and um morag and ali and they they had a plan
they knew what they were doing in a kind of chaotic crazy way very libertarian yeah yeah very and and
you know that was a show that they were assembling so we made kev with the kind of i think i was
meant to be balor there's a retelling of one of the myths isn't it an irish myth battle of the evil
eye uh it's luke with the shining arms and luke that's right kev was luke the guy that gets reborn
and i was sort of baddy and louis and balor was interesting because it's almost like a premonition
of um or sort of nuclear power isn't it and balor has a secret weapon that you that that you have
to have seven eyelids open and when it's fully open you can't i mean it's like it's like nuclear
non-nuclear you know isn't it it's like a combination of it yeah crazy thing so i remember having a really
good costume that ali and tom did for balor yeah i think it was i mean yeah it's had all that kind
of imagery in it and it was that great sight wasn't it that long strip with the sort of palm
trees at the bottom jousting field down the bottom of saint donna's castle yeah it's good yeah it was
there's a swimming pool there i remember having a day and we went swimming and there's a sort of
college there isn't it atlantic college is it that's right yeah it's the baccalaureate yeah it was
just a great i remember sort of driving the van the swicker van around there doing donuts in the field
yeah and it's pretty crazy pretty crazy event performance but but um so that if that was 96
so you had two children back in those years one was born in 96 one was born in the same year as
the cube so i must have pretty much pulled out of still some performance stuff and put all my energy
into the cube cinema so i can't i co-founded it with kev actually and two other people
um and so you're a co-founder of the cube yeah yeah yeah me and kevin are co-founders of it so
i'm the only remaining yeah co-founder of it yeah it was our was our project how long has that been
going on since 98 yeah like 15 years 15 years it's pretty great and um actually weirdly enough we
me and kev did you remember those cameras we did yeah yeah for poncepool market centenary yeah
yeah you were two giant cameras we designed those for abariss with film festival that's right so we
actually designed these costumes and sent them off you know it's getting it was one of those ways of
trying to get work in those days we sort of thought what what need what who wants a giant
walks that walking camera a film festival so we sort of and all the film passes we sent
sent the imagery to only two ever got back london film festival we opened in empire in the empire
unless a square one year these giant still cameras which is a crazy story but then and then
abariss with film festival welsh international film festival said will you prepare to come up
for 10 days and um and work so we did that and and each after we finished doing our appearances
in the evening at the in the in the club that was the headquarters whatever all this office
there was this really good vibe of people hanging around and nothing to do and we thought wouldn't
it be good to have like a club where you could sort of hang around and show films and stuff and
that's where we got this idea of like a cinema as social wow in abariss with and then yeah and
we came back to bristol and then we we had a sort of loft space that we did these kind of legal
screenings and stuff in club rhombus but we did that for about a year and then then this this venue
closed down that we that was a cinema and we thought let's try and take it on in my own sort
of cinema thing i said it was a 98 so so the long story around from there is that we so i stopped
kev carried on but i can pretty much stop doing any carnival um even st paul's and stuff and
i kept us still get up almost religiously every year at st paul's and stuff i've always thought
was amazing you know but i just couldn't i just changed my whole area of you know work in a way
you know and didn't do it for years and years and years until um the earthquake in struck haiti and
and a group of people at the cube thought that we should be good idea to try and take out like a
mobile cinema which consisted of a video projector and dvds and a screen and and they just show films
for the camps where people have been the home people in the camps and people are homeless
um and and a lot of children are family-less you know orphans and stuff yeah horrendous kind
of circumstances and um so what work with the audience so i was in the third we sent
earthquake survivors what do they watch we sent we sent three groups the first year they went was
very shortly after the earthquake and that was quite hard um and then there's another group and
then i was in the third group by the time we went they'd established what worked really well with
the audience and stuff but it was things like the red balloon um this kind of new guinea film
ballon d'or um kirk who saw stress kind of films and stuff you know so and they'd watch the same
film over and over again you know and always laugh at the same points and and and stuff and
but um but it so happened that when we went it was carnival season you see and i knew that we
were going to be there in carnival season and um i'd heard a little bit about this kind of famous
carnival in jackmail which is in the south south of the the port of prince which is struck by
that area got hit by the carnival the most it's on like a beginning of a peninsula and on the
northern part of that is port of prince and leogan where we were based for the first few weeks and
then on the southern part of that peninsula there's um a place called jackmail and um and
this has got quite a famous carnival quite a famous um sort of really raw almost african
you know very non-commercialized um no toys i mean carnival and so the carnival when we were there
that was the like the year before the carnival had been cancelled throughout the whole of haiti
because of the earthquake that's how bad the earthquake was the cancel the carnival had been
cancelled which is like cancelling christmas here you know cancelling every calendar and you know all
in one can you imagine so so when the carnival was on this was the first time it had been back on
again so they were coming back with a really big a big party you know um so so i knew that
we were going to be there for the carnival so it kind of reignited that interest in
in it i suppose didn't know what to expect um but it was a pretty immense kind of folk
occasion really um just such massive sort of participation and in it from people you know
you know um there was also some um traditional um characters i mean you mentioned the black
jude the man with the mysterious box and the devils take us through those yeah um so i mean
they so there was a route they parade they do follow a route and when we they had the carnival
we went down to this area we had this guy called michelle who who was who showed us around and he
was really good he was like kind of fixer in a way and translator and stuff and we took us down
this big camp bit and there were all these paper mache style kind of costumes and things you know
so that we that we just didn't know what form it would take didn't know how would they be parading
with big backpacks was it you know kind of traditional characters didn't really know much
about it so when we when i first saw that i thought okay right i thought okay that's they
do that here the tradition of these kind of big big heads and these kind of sculptures almost
people just carry you know and really intricately made and painted you know really um very kind of
literal in the sense you know not not gestural that really solid kind of characters and
and each one illustrates a bit from some folk story or some voodoo god or godess or something
um and then so they have that and they all get paraded and then there's kids versions of it
and stuff and but then they have these these devils which which people walk around and which are
which are effectively that style of making but just the head it's like a big horned you know
um devil headdress but then the rest of the the rest of the costume might be just boots
you know tasselie tunic trousers but then these wings that they have which are kind of wings that
want to kind of a backpack but they're like big flaps of wood so they they can slap them they can
snap them behind like a bit like the crocodile in a way in punch and judy's kind of thing that snaps
they kind of clacker and they they kind of go along and clack them and um and then they parade
they kind of parade in single file so they do this thing where they kind of all follow each other
around you know um but i mean you know i can't even begin to i mean there's just so many there's
this kind of free agent characters around around there's just another group which they all like
this they were based on a general some famous historic general who is either a good guy or a
bad guy i'm not quite sure what he what he did and um they have all these kind of big lips and they
and you know these kind of military tops medals and stuff and then they just do these dances and
there's big groups of guys who are all doing that one character again moving in single file
but just doing these very particular dances and things you know um so it's just so much going on
it was just hard to kind of keep you know keep keep keep on top of it all and um and then ones
i'll describe yesterday thing with a sort of like a single uh a line of guys all next standing next
to each other walking along sort of barefoot but just kind of paint painted white with these placards
around but just moving really like ghosts just really silently so down the street what do they say
on the placard i'm an ex i think she's got freedom liberty you know because of course haiti's got
comment yeah because they have that there's a lot there is a deep awareness there of them having
come from slaves and it was the first black country wasn't it absolutely it's got an incredible
history and um and then the voodoo is another big movement out there as well um you know in the
in the parade you'd get actually some christian groups who are sort of very evangelical women in
white and singing singing they've got christian songs and things across this yeah yeah because
because it's that whole cocktail of religion there yeah cocktail of religion and superstition
so the christians got involved but on their own terms yeah exactly yeah yeah on their own terms
they don't really enter into the but then but then right next to them would be this this crazy
you know voodoo group everyone's just going wild and they're turning these kind of effigies of
things along and they're running around and and uh it's amazing um and voodoo out there is is kind
of like a kind of alternative it's like a kind of a it's like they're i don't know it's kind of
i mean it's a pagan thing but it's it's it's hard again it's hard to sort of describe the kind of
the context of it there because it's much more to do with with tolerance and
everyone being equal and being welcomed so i went to voodoo ceremony and it was like
it was like a kind of a rave meets kind of a you know knees up in a pub it's like a community
sing sing song community get together uh community piss up you know one's drinking
rum and dancing and socializing and and yeah i mean i've got some music i've got some recordings
of the drumming and stuff but yeah i mean yeah literally like again like i said to you
there's a stage of the drummers it's about 20 maybe and um there's one guy that's the
main lead drummer and when they start they just start this kind of very fast tempo and that's it
it just stays at that tempo solidly for like four hours and then they take a break and then
then it starts again same time during that period that the people who are possessed come
yes the women are kind of parading around singing and then and then priests and
precesses are there so the women are part of the voodoo group that of the temple that you're in
and this one they had white with bits of pink clothes on and then towards the end of the second
session they kind of go into the chances and things yeah so people come into the middle and
circle around and then well more than no one got possessed but um you can see them sort of trying
and then oh no okay and then sort of shuffling off because you know they'd like they'd failed you know
so yeah that was quite amazing the um the jackmill carnival yeah you know again i'd like to go again
actually i think it'd be really nice to now haven't done it once to kind of go again and see
see how it works there's there's um there's a group out there doing like these puppets
the french group that doing these you know ones that go on backpacks and the heads go up really
high and you and then they have the big hands and the sleeves and you sort of walk along with them you know
i'd say one of the joys of this anniversary project is getting to reconnect with people
like yourself who haven't seen for going on for 20 years and what i find is that you know i think
we've already in a during our exhibition at the carlis story uh ogee's going to come along and
we'll make a presentation with uh sound recordings and the rest of it based on his experiences in
haiti and the jack and the carnival in particular but i think we have sort of decided that we need
to go and visit that and see whether that can't be the basis of some form of collaborative and
intercultural exchange in the future i mean in swicker we haven't done that since 2005
when i went to trinidad last and worked with the blue devils traditional character up on the
mountain behind port of spain uh paramin and then we brought them over and we did all kinds of things
so um i can't say this has been the most fascinating conversation it's been absolutely
wonderful and i would like to end by saying ogee you are a carl hero thank you very much
for all your memories it's a pleasure thank you very much